# How Did I Build This? - May 31st, 2016

This is typically the moment where a blogger would apologize for taking so long between posts. Since I'm not a real blogger I'm going to skip that part.

In this post I'll walk you though how and why I built this blog engine, why I made the decisions that I did, and what improvements I'd like to make.

Feel free to check out the code [here](http://www.github.com/dylanbhughes/markdownblog).

I built this blog as part of my time at [MakerSquare](https://www.makersquare.com). Specifically, I built it for a portion of the course called the MVP project. For this project, we had 24 hours to build a web application alone and completely from scratch (no boilerplate and no serious libraries). The ideal is to build something simple that will provide some actual utility.

I decided that I wanted to solve a problem that I've had with blogging on sites like Medium: typing in the browser. I know, I know, it seems silly to really care about something so small. But for me, writing is a disconnected activity. I clear my screen. I do research as a separately. I disconnect and just focus on my structuring my thoughts. So writing in the browser has always bugged me because it forces me to stay connected and distracted. I also don't like clicking around when I write. I like to incorporate styling directly into what I'm writing. So, naturally, when I discovered markdown I fell in love with the format and vowed to write everything in that format from now on.

With my solution in mind, I proceeded to design my simple app. I had to limit my scope to account for my time constraint, so I didn't shoot for anything too fancy. I decided that my goals would be:
1. The app reads .md files from the filesystem
2. The app dynamically assembled HTML pages during the build
3. The resulting page had good style and a responsive design
4. The page was easy to read no matter what markdown features I decided to use

I also set some stretch goals:
1. Post-specific links
2. List of post-specific links at the top of the page
3. Dynamically add the date to a post based on the file's creation date.

With these goals in mind, I started by setting up my skeleton app. I wrote a quick README and ```npm install``ed express and body-parser. I then wrote my basic index.js file:

```js
// index.js
var express = require('express');
var app = express();
var bodyParser = require('body-parser');

app.set('port', (process.env.PORT || 8000));

app.use(express.static('public'));

app.listen(app.get('port'), () => {
  console.log('MarkdownBlog is running on port ', app.get('port'));
});
```

Once I had the boilerplate down, I had to decide how I was going to parse the markdown. Keeping my time constraint in mind, I decided that writing a whole new markdown parser might not be the smartest move. Luckily, [*there's an npm module for that*](https://www.npmjs.com/package/markdown-it).

The next step was to make up my header and footer html files:

```HTML
<!-- header -->
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>

<head>

  <meta charset="utf-8">
  <meta content="IE=edge,chrome=1" http-equiv="X-UA-Compatible">
  <meta name="description" content="This is the personal blog of Dylan Hughes, a sofwtare engineer living in Washington, DC.">
  <meta name="author" content="Dylan Hughes">
  <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1, maximum-scale=1">
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="//cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/highlight.js/9.2.0/styles/default.min.css">
  <script src="//cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/highlight.js/9.2.0/highlight.min.js"></script>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="./main.css">
  <link rel="icon" type="image/png" sizes="16x16" href="images/favicon-16x16.png">

  <title>{blog}s</title>

</head>
<body>
  <div class="headerDiv">
    <div class="nav">
      <a href="https://www.dylanbhughes.io">dylanbhughes.io</a>
      <a href="https://www.github.com/dylanbhughes">Github</a>
      <a href="https://www.facebook.com/dylanbhghes">Facebook</a>
      <a class="linkedin" href="https://www.linkedin.com/in/dylanbhughes">LinkedIn</a>
    </div>
    <div class="bannerDiv">
      <h1>Look! A Blog!</h1>
      <p>
        Yeah I went ahead and wrote one of these things. If you're new here my name's Dylan and I'm a software engineer living in New York. I'm always up for constructive criticism, advice, and collaboration: <a href="mailto:dylanbhughes@gmail.com">dylanbhughes@gmail.com</a>
      </p>
    </div>
  </div>
  <div class="main">
```

```HTML
<!-- footer -->
<div class="footer">
  <p style="font-size: 10px">&copy;Dylan Hughes Designs, LLC</p>
</div>
</div>
</body>
<script>hljs.initHighlightingOnLoad();</script>
</html>
```

I knew that, at least to start, I'd be loading each post in order between my header and footer. I decided to extract that functionality out of my index.js, so I updated it:

```js
var express = require('express');
var app = express();
var bodyParser = require('body-parser');
var utils = require('./utils.js');

app.set('port', (process.env.PORT || 8000));

utils.writeIndex();

app.use(express.static('public'));

app.listen(app.get('port'), () => {
  console.log('MarkdownBlog is running on port ', app.get('port'));
});
```

And began working on my utils.js file, which came out like this:

```js
var fs = require('fs');
var MarkdownIt = require('markdown-it');
var md = new MarkdownIt();
// TODO: Make these ENV Variables
var posts = __dirname + '/posts/';
var footer = __dirname + '/templates/footer.html';
var header = __dirname + '/templates/header.html';
var index = __dirname + '/public/index.html';
var fileDescriptor;
var postNames;

module.exports.writeIndex = function() {
  var indexFileDescriptor;
  fs.writeFile(index, '', (err) => {
    if(err) {
      console.log(err);
    }
    writeHead(writePosts);
  });
}

function writeHead(callback) {
  console.log('made it into writehead');
  fs.open(index, 'a', (err, fd) => {
    if (err) {
      console.error("Error opening index: ", err);
    }
    fileDescriptor = fd;
    fs.readFile(header, (err, data) => {
      if(err) {
        console.error('error reading header: ', err);
      }
      console.log('headerfile data');
      fs.write(fileDescriptor, data + "", (err, written, string) => {
        fs.close(fileDescriptor, (err) => {
          if(err) {
            console.error("Error closing index.html", err);
          }
          console.log('Index Closed');
          callback();
        });
      });
    });
  });
}

function writePosts() {
  fs.readdir(posts, (err, data) => {
    if(err) {
      console.error("Error reading posts directory: ", err);
    }
    data.reverse();
    let counter = 0;
    let max = data.length -1;
    function readAFile(){
      var postName = data[counter];
      fs.readFile(posts + data[counter], (err, data) => {
        if(err) {
          console.error('Error reading markdown file: ', err);
        }
        var convertedData = md.render(data + "");
        convertedData = wrapInPostDiv(convertedData, postName);
        console.log("Post data converted");
        fs.open(index, 'a', (err, fd) => {
          fs.write(fd, convertedData, (err, written, string) => {
            if (err) {
              console.error("Error writing a markdown file: ", err);
            }
            console.log(written, " bytes written to index.html");
            if(counter < max){
              ++counter;
              readAFile();
            }
            // else {
            //   console.log('finished');
            // }
            else {
              writeFooter();
            }
          });
        });
      });
    };
    readAFile();
  });
  // writeHead();
};

function writeFooter() {
  fs.readFile(footer, (err, data) => {
    if(err) {
      console.error("Error reading footer", err);
    }
    //console.log('Footer: ', data + "");
    fs.write(fileDescriptor, data + "", (err) => {
      if(err) {
        console.error("Error writing footer", err);
      }
      fs.close(fileDescriptor, (err) => {
        if(err) {
          console.error("error closing index.", err);
        }
      });
    });
  });
}

function wrapInPostDiv(htmlString, postName) {
  // wraps converted markdown in a div with the class of post
  return '<div class="post">\n'
    + '<a name="post'
    + postName.substring(0,1)
    + '" ></a>\n'
    + htmlString
    + '\n</div>\n';
}
```

Obviously this is still the first iteration of my code and I've definitely improved a bit as a developer since I wrote this, but it's a good first pass. At this point I went ahead and played around with some CSS until I got things looking the way I wanted.

```CSS
@media (min-width: 768px) {

  .main {
    margin-left: auto;
    margin-right: auto;
    width: 60%;
  }

  .bannerDiv {
    margin-left: auto;
    margin-right: auto;
    width: 60%;
  }

}

@media (max-width: 384px) {

  a.linkedin {
    visibility: hidden;
  }

}

html {
  overflow-x: hidden;
}

body {
  font-family: helvetica, sans-serif;
  padding: 0px;
  width: 100%;
  margin: 0px;
}

a {
  text-decoration: none;
}

.bannerDiv {
  margin-left: auto;
  margin-right: auto;
  padding-left: 25px;
  padding-right: 25px;
  padding-bottom: 10px;
}

.main {
  color: black;
  margin-left: auto;
  margin-right: auto;
  padding-left: 25px;
  padding-right: 25px;
}

.post {
  padding-bottom: 15px;
  background-color: white;
}

.footer {
  padding-top: 15px;
}

.headerDiv p {
  font-style: italic;
}

.headerDiv {
  color: white;
  background: -webkit-linear-gradient(to left, #000000 , #434343); /* Chrome 10-25, Safari 5.1-6 */
  background: linear-gradient(to left, #000000 , #434343); /* W3C, IE 10+/ Edge, Firefox 16+, Chrome 26+, Opera 12+, Safari 7+ */
  width: 100%;
}

.headerDiv a {
  color: white;
}

.nav {
  padding: 10px;
}

.nav a {
  padding: 5px;
  font-size: 14px;
}

```

The point of this post is really to demonstrate that it's okay to start with something basic and to improve from there. You'll notice that I implemented one of the stretch goals: post specific anchors. I ended up having a bit of extra time and so I pushed myself a bit. Looking back on this code I'm excited to see how far I've come. I look forward to refactoring what I have here. Who knows, maybe someone will even use this to write their own blog.
